Design: "Image Configuration in Helm Chart" (#7748)
cert-manager/cert-manager: design/20250512.images-in-the-helm-chart.md

# Image Configuration in Helm Chart: add $.imagePrefix and support default digest

<!-- toc -->
- [Release Signoff Checklist](#release-signoff-checklist)
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [User Stories (Optional)](#user-stories-optional)
    - [Story 1](#story-1)
    - [Story 2](#story-2)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

This checklist contains actions which must be completed before a PR implementing this design can be merged.

- [ ] This design doc has been discussed and approved
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been PR-ed against the release branch in [cert-manager/website]

## Summary

> We propose to replace the existing `image.registry` and `image.repository` options with `$.imagePrefix`, `image.name` and `image.repository`. Allowing users to change the registry/ image location by only changing 1 value (`$.imagePrefix`). Additionally, we will introduce the `image._defaultReference` value which will allow us to set a default digest value that still can be overwritten by setting `image.tag`.

Reviewer: Instead of introducing a custom "image prefix", I think we should fix the obviously wrong default on the `image.registry` value, and probably drop the `image.repository` value. The correct default for `image.registry` would at present be `quay.io/jetstack`, which will allow any user to set this once if pulling images through a proxy. There should be no need to override the image name.

Author: I think that would break `use case 1`, which I think is a very common use case.
Could you explain your proposal by adding/ updating the use cases?

Reviewer: Which use case? The most common reason to play around with these image settings is if you are in a situation where `quay.io/jetstack` is not directly available, and have to use some kind of image proxy/mirroring solution. In this case, you don't want to set your image proxy/mirror registry more than once.

Reviewer: So what I'm suggesting is about the same as you propose, except that we use "common" Helm values for this, instead of introducing something custom. My `image.registry` is the same as your `image.prefix`.

Author: Story 1: https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/pull/7748/files#diff-5c6a0bdaa3c837dda3d0a38e891fc3e939d67a249fdd61d0d31aab5936db631fR98

I would like to gather a set of helm install commands to understand the exact user-facing (breaking) changes.

Reviewer: Why can't we have a "global" `image.registry` property? It is the same as you are proposing, except that we follow an already established pattern in other Kubernetes community projects.

Reviewer: @inteon, I think the approach suggested here will improve our projects, so I really want to push this forward. I consider the term `prefix` to be too vague, as it is a relative "measurement". Maybe @jsoref can help out here? I asked ChatGPT for an overview over the terms here, and I think it's agreeing with me. 😆 

<img width="743" height="613" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ef22032a-0a1d-49da-9533-effb2b2af386" />

2. To improve security, we would like to change our default image references to be digest based. The current structure does not cleanly allow us to do this. If we set a default for `image.digest`, users who only specify `image.tag` will not see any change in their rendered YAML (since `image.digest` takes precedence over `image.tag`).

### Goals

- make it possible to change the OCI image registry by modifying 1 value in values.yaml
- simplify the `image` struct and only keep fields that make sense to be modified by users
- when leaving `image.tag` and `image.digest` empty, the image should look like `image:default-tag@sha256:default-digest`
- when setting `image.tag`, the default digest should be ignored
- when setting `image.digest`, the default digest should be ignored
- when setting `image.tag` and `image.digest`, the image should look like `image:custom-tag@sha256:custom-digest`

### Non-Goals

- introducing logic to add a digest to `image._defaultReference`

## Proposal

We propose the following `image` values.yaml structure:
```yaml
# The container registry and repository namespace to pull the images from.
# +docs:property

> imagePrefix: quay.io/jetstack

Reviewer 2: Probably out of scope, but when will this change to cert-manager.io?

image:
    # The name of the image to pull (is combined with $.imagePrefix).
    # +docs:property
    name: cert-manager-controller

    # The full container image URL. When set, .name and $.imagePrefix
    # are not used to compute the image URL.
    # +docs:property
    # repository: my-registry.local/cert-manager/my-image

    # Sets the image tag.
    # +docs:property
    # tag: vX.Y.Z

    # Sets the image digest. Kubernetes will pull the image
    # based on digest if both digest and tag are provided.
    # +docs:property
    # digest: sha256:0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000

    # Default tag + digest combination that is used when neither tag or digest

>     # are set. This value is generated when the chart is build and should not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # is set. This value is generated when the chart is built and should not
```

NOTE: This will be a backwards incompatible change in case you were using `image.registry`.

## Motivation

1. The current settings in our `image` Helm values are complex and don't fix our users' use cases (see https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/pull/7558).
The usefulness right now of `image.registry` is highly questionable, you always have to overwrite both `image.registry` and `image.repository` since `image.registry` defaults to an empty string (`""`) and `image.repository` defaults to `quay.io/jetstack/cert-manager-controller`. Additionally, you have to overwrite `image.registry` for each of the images individually.

2. To improve security, we would like to change our default image references to be digest based. The current structure does not cleanly allow us to do this. If we set a default for `image.digest`, users who only specify `image.tag` will not see any change in their rendered YAML (since `image.digest` takes precedence over `image.tag`).

> ### Goals

Author: done

    # +docs:property
    tag: v1.2.3

    # Setting a digest will override any tag.
    # +docs:property
    # digest: sha256:0e072dddd1f7f8fc8909a2ca6f65e76c5f0d2fcfb8be47935ae3457e8bbceb20

    # Kubernetes imagePullPolicy on Deployment.
    pullPolicy: IfNotPresent
```

And this is the template we use to generate the image string:
```
{{- define "image" -}}
{{- $defaultTag := index . 1 -}}
{{- with index . 0 -}}
{{- if .registry -}}{{ printf "%s/%s" .registry .repository }}{{- else -}}{{- .repository -}}{{- end -}}
{{- if .digest -}}{{ printf "@%s" .digest }}{{- else -}}{{ printf ":%s" (default $defaultTag .tag) }}{{- end -}}
{{- end }}
{{- end }}
```

And in pseudocode:
```pseudocode
if values.image.registry != "" {
  repository = values.image.registry + "/" + values.image.repository
} else {
  repository = values.image.repository
}

if values.image.digest != "" {
  tagAndDigest = "@" + values.image.digest
} else {
  tagAndDigest = ":" + values.image.tag
}

fullImage = repository + tagAndDigest
```

## Proposal

We propose the following `image` values.yaml structure:
```yaml
# The container registry and repository namespace to pull the images from.
# +docs:property

> imagePrefix: quay.io/jetstack

Reviewer: In my org, we use Aritfactory as a registry proxy. For images from quay.io, we have to use a registry with the following structure: `artifactory.mycompany.com/quay-docker-remote`.

So, in order to use a registry proxy in front of these images with the prefix, I would have to know the postfix of the default prefix, too. 😄 My `imagePrefix` value would have to be set to `artifactory.mycompany.com/quay-docker-remote/jetstack`, which I'm not a big fan of.
